# Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol Version 3 for IPv4 and IPv6

## RFC 5798

### Q: What is VRRP?

A: VRRP specifies an election protocol that dynamically assigns
responsibility for a virtual router to one of the VRRP routers on a
LAN.

### Q: Goal

A: The VRRP protocol design provides rapid transition from Backup to
Master to minimize service interruption and incorporates
optimizations that reduce protocol complexity while guaranteeing
controlled Master transition for typical operational scenarios.

It dynamically provides alternative gateways for end hosts if the
primary gateway fails.

### Q: Brief Introduction of VRRP?

A: The VRRP router controlling the IPv4 or IPv6 address(es) associated with
a virtual router is called the Master, and forwards packets sent to
these IPv4 or IPv6 addresses. VRRP Master routers are configured with
virtual IPv4 or IPv6 addresses, and VRRP Backup routers infer the
address family of the virtual addresses being carried based on the
transport protocol. Within a VRRP router, the virtual routers in
each of the IPv4 and IPv6 address families are a domain unto
themselves and do not overlap.  The election process provides dynamic
failover in the forwarding responsibility should the Master become
unavailable.

### Q: Advantage

A: For IPv4, the advantage gained from using VRRP is a
higher-availability default path without requiring configuration of
dynamic routing or router discovery protocols on every end-host.  For
IPv6, the advantage gained from using VRRP for IPv6 is a quicker
switchover to Backup routers than can be obtained with standard IPv6
Neighbor Discovery mechanisms.

### Definition

- VRRP Router
- Virtual Router: abstract object maintained by VRRP Router. Virtual Router = Identifier + `LAN_IPs`.
- IP Address Owner: VRRP Router which respond to packets.
- Primary IP Owner: VRRP advertisements are sent to it.
- Virtual Router Master
- Virtual Router Backup

### Features

- IPvX Address Backup: **Primary Function**
    - election of a virtual router master
    - minimize the duration of black holes
    - minimize the bandwidth
    - multiple type of LAN
    - multiple virtual routers
    - multiple logical IPvX subnets on a single LAN segment.
- Preferred Path Indication
    - each router is equal preference and claim victory after converging
    - or, other policies based on
        - access link cost
        - speed
        - router performance
        - reliability
        - etc.
    - should:
        - set the relative path
        - guarantee Master convergence to the most preferential router currently available.
- Minimization of Unnecessary Service Disruptions
    - when Master is available, there should not be any state transition by Backup Router.
    - why: it will cause disruption, which is unacceptable.
- Efficient Operation over Extended LANs
    - why: The use of MAC addr in an extended LAN employing learning bridges can have significantly effect, since virtual router MAC address is never used as the source address.
    - how:
        - use MAC address of virtual router to trigger station learning
        - trigger message after transition to update station learning
        - trigger periodic messages from Master to maintain the station learning cache
- Sub-Second Operation for IPv4 and IPv6
    - what is this: quickly switching between Master and Backup in every seconds.
    - why: `VRRP_Advertisement_Intervals` is small, hence large queueing delay, if `Master_Down_Interval` is small enough, it happens.
    - how:
        - priority forwarding of VRRP packets
        - Master observe the situation and at least log the problem

### Overview

- performed messages: multicast datagrams
- allocate MAC address for each link of a VRRP virtual router (as source in message to enable bridge learning)
- virtual router = VRID + IPs
- scope of virtual router: restricted on a single LAN
- support additional virtual routing mapping and priority
- only Master can send VRRP Advertisement Messages
- the master sends advertisements to the backup switches at regular intervals
- Switches configured with VRRP share a virtual IP address
- If the backup switches do not receive an advertisement for a set period, the backup with the highest priority takes over as master within a few seconds and begins forwarding packets.
- Backup will not preempt the Master unless it has higher priority
- **If the Master becomes unavailable, then the highest- priority Backup will transition to Master after a short delay, providing a controlled transition of the virtual router responsibility with minimal service interruption.**

### Scenarios

#### 2 VRRP Routers implementing 1 virutal router

Example:

            +-----------+ +-----------+
            |   Rtr1    | |   Rtr2    |
            |(MR VRID=1)| |(BR VRID=1)|
            |           | |           |
    VRID=1  +-----------+ +-----------+
    IPvX A--------->*            *<---------IPvX B
                    |            |
                    |            |
    ----------------+------------+-----+----------+----------+----------+--
                                    ^          ^          ^          ^
                                    |          |          |          |
    default rtr IPvX addrs-------> (IPvX A)   (IPvX A)   (IPvX A)   (IPvX A)
                                    |          |          |          |
                            IPvX H1->* IpvX H2->* IPvX H3->* IpvX H4->*
                                    +--+--+    +--+--+    +--+--+    +--+--+
                                    |  H1 |    |  H2 |    |  H3 |    |  H4 |
                                    +-----+    +-----+    +--+--+    +--+--+
    Legend:
            --+---+---+-- = Ethernet, Token Ring, or FDDI
                        H = Host computer
                        MR = Master Router
                        BR = Backup Router
                        *  =  IPvX Address; X is 4 everywhere in IPv4 case
                                            X is 6 everywhere in IPv6 case
                        (IPvX) = default router for hosts

- each router is assigned IP address on the LAN interface
- each host installs a static default route
- the VRRP protocol manages virtual router failover to a Backup router

#### 2 Virtual Routes with the hosts splitting their traffic between them

Example:

            +-----------+      +-----------+
            |   Rtr1    |      |   Rtr2    |
            |(MR VRID=1)|      |(BR VRID=1)|
            |(BR VRID=2)|      |(MR VRID=2)|
    VRID=1  +-----------+      +-----------+  VRID=2
    IPvX A -------->*            *<---------- IPvX B
                    |            |
                    |            |
    ----------------+------------+-----+----------+----------+----------+--
                                    ^          ^          ^          ^
                                    |          |          |          |
    default rtr IPvX addrs -----> (IPvX A)   (IPvX A)   (IPvX B)   (IPvX B)
                                    |          |          |          |
                            IPvX H1->* IpvX H2->* IPvX H3->* IpvX H4->*
                                    +--+--+    +--+--+    +--+--+    +--+--+
                                    |  H1 |    |  H2 |    |  H3 |    |  H4 |
                                    +-----+    +-----+    +--+--+    +--+--+
    Legend:
            ---+---+---+--  =  Ethernet, Token Ring, or FDDI
                        H  =  Host computer
                        MR  =  Master Router
                        BR  =  Backup Router
                        *  =  IPvX Address; X is 4 everywhere in IPv4 case
                                            X is 6 everywhere in IPv6 case
                    (IPvX)  =  default router for hosts

Source: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc5798/?include_text=1
Wiki: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_Router_Redundancy_Protocol
Useful Link: https://www.juniper.net/techpubs/en_US/junos14.1/topics/concept/vrrp-qfx-series.html
