# An Ethernet Address Resolution Protocol

- Converting Network Protocol Addresses to 48.bit Ethernet Address for Transmission on Ethernet Hardware.  A.K.A.  Man IP network addresses to the hardware addresses used by a data link protocol. (Used when IP is over Ethernet)
- Packet Generation
    - A packet is sent down through the network layer.
    - The Address Resolution module tries to find (protocol type, address) in table.
    - If it finds the pair, it gives the corresponding MAC address back to the caller which then transmits the packet.
        - Else: throw packet away. The packet will be retransmitted to a higher network layer.
    - The Address Resolution module set resolved address in packet, which may be either a host's MAC address or broadcasting address.
- Some Tips
    - Network Interface Card(NIC) is allocated a globally 6 byte unique link address by factory manufacturers.
    - A computer sends All packets attaches MAC address as source address, and receives all packets which matches the same MAC address.
    - The Ethernet address is a link layer address and is dependent on the interface card which is used. IP operates at the network layer and is not concerned with the link addresses of individual nodes which are to be used.The address resolution protocol (arp) is therefore used to translate between the two types of address. The arp client and server processes operate on all computers using IP over Ethernet.
    - The processes are normally implemented as part of the software driver that drives the network interface card.
    - A client caches resolved address for a short period of time.
    - If a host changes the MAC address it is using, this can be detected by other hosts when the cache entry is deleted and a fresh arp message is sent to establish the new association. The use of gratuitous arp (e.g. triggered when the new NIC interface is enabled with an IP address) provides a more rapid update of this information.
    - The arp request message is about: `who is X.X.X.X, tell Y.Y.Y.Y`.
    - The arp response message is about: `X.X.X.X is hh:hh:hh:hh:hh:hh`. It's unicast to Y.Y.Y.Y.
    - Gratuitous ARP is used when a node (end system) has selected an IP address and then wishes to defend its chosen address on the local area network.

---

- [Source: RFC 826](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc826)
- [Introduction of Address Resolution Protocol (arp)](http://www.erg.abdn.ac.uk/users/gorry/course/inet-pages/arp.html)
